---
title: Multipath TCP Subflow Rate Limit Option
abbrev: mptcp-sub-rate-limit-opt
docname: draft-hoang-mptcp-sub-rate-limit-00
date: 2019-07-08
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: TSV
workgroup: MPTCP Working Group
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: V. Tran
    name: Viet-Hoang Tran
    organization: Universite catholique de Louvain
    email: hoang.tran@uclouvain.be
 -
    ins: O. Bonaventure
    name: Olivier Bonaventure
    organization: Universite catholique de Louvain
    street: Pl. Ste Barbe, 2
    city: Louvain-la-Neuve
    code: 1348
    country: Belgium
    email: olivier.bonaventure@uclouvain.be

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC6181:
  RFC6824:
  RFC7430:
 

informative:
  I-D.ietf-mptcp-rfc6824bis:
  RFC8040:
  RFC3630:


--- abstract

This document defines a new MPTCP Option that enables hosts to request their peers to limit the maximum transfer rate on a per-subflow basis.


--- middle

Introduction        {#problems}
============

Multipath TCP {{RFC6824}} {{I-D.ietf-mptcp-rfc6824bis}} is used in various use cases {{RFC8040}}. In several situations, a Multipath TCP host would like its peer to limit the sending rate over a specific subflow.

It is common for mobile clients to have limited cellular data subscription. Even if this is not the case, mobile network operators may still silently throttle the networking capacity of the customers
who have used up a large amount of cellular data. A good LTE or 5G connection running at full speed during
less than a few hours could consume the entire monthly budget cellular quota of many users.
This is even more important when the mobile clients are roaming
abroad where the monetary cost for cellular data can be very high. A common
scenario is that mobile users want to limit the monetary cost of
using cellular networks or to avoid running out of their mobile data
quota. Smartphones can easily rate limit their upstream bandwidth, but
unfortunately, most smartphone applications mainly receive data. For these
applications, a rate limit must happen on the server side. This rate limit could
be enforced by the application, e.g. by selecting a specific video coding scheme, but applying it at the transport layer would be more generic and could be done from the system level automatically.



Terminology          {#Terminology}
===========
In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
"SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 {{RFC2119}}.

 

The Multipath TCP Subflow Rate Limit (SRL) Option   {#ops}
=========================================

This document proposes a Subflow Rate Limit option that indicates a maximum receive rate for the subflow it is sent. Like other MPTCP options, this option is not sent reliably. Hosts SHOULD resend it several times, but not more frequently than once per second.

Option Format      {#format}
--------------

The format of the SRL option is depicted in Fig. {{figformat}}:

~~~~~~~~~~
    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +---------------+---------------+-------+-------+---------------+
   |     Kind      |  Length = 7   |Subtype| (rsv) | Requested Rate|
   +---------------+---------------+-------+-------+---------------+
   |       Requested Rate                          |
   +-----------------------------------------------+

~~~~~~~~~~
{: #figformat title="MPTCP Subflow Rate Limit Option Format"}

All reserved bits MUST be set to zero.

In the SRL option, the Requested Rate (32 bits) is specified in IEEE 754 binary32 format (single-precision binary floating-point format). The same format is used in {{RFC3630}} to specify the maximum bandwidth of a link. This format is as follows:

~~~~~~~~~~
   0                   1                   2                   3
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |S|    Exponent   |                  Fraction                   |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

~~~~~~~~~~
{: #figIEEE title="IEEE binary32 format"}

* Sign bit (1 bit) MUST be set to zero.
* Exponent (8 bits) is the exponent base 2 in "excess 127" notation.
* Fraction (23 bits) is the mantissa - 1, with an implied binary point in front of it.

Thus, the above represents the value:

      (-1)**(S) * 2**(Exponent-127) * (1 + Fraction)

The unit of this value is Kilobits per second (Kbps).


SRL Option and Local Policies
-----------------------------

Note that the SRL option is an indicative value. Upon reception of this option, the receiver SHOULD set the maximum rate on the subflow over which the option was received.

Like all Multipath TCP options, the SRL Option is exchanged without any protection from TCP's reliability mechanisms.  Therefore, implementations MUST NOT assume that it is transferred reliably. Implementations that use the SRL option can transmit the SRL option at any time. Since the utilisation of this option is not negotiated during the connection handshake, a host MUST NOT send more than three SRL options on a connection.


Implementation and Interoperability
===================================

Implementations MAY use various mechanisms to implement the rate control policy, for example using TCP Pacing or clamping the subflow congestion window.
For old implementations that are unaware of this option, they should ignore when receive unknown MPTCP options, as specified in {{RFC6824}} and {{I-D.ietf-mptcp-rfc6824bis}}.

Security Considerations
=======================

Since the SRL option is neither encrypted nor authenticated, on-path attackers and middleboxes could remove, add or modify the SRL option on observed Multipath TCP connections. However, manipulating this option doing not open new attacks compared to the ones documented in {{RFC6181}} {{RFC7430}}.

For example, an on-path middle man could insert an option to throttle the rate on a subflow to nearly zero, effectively stalling the subflow. However, if an attacker has that capability, it could instead drop all packets or inject the TCP-RST/MP-FASTCLOSE.

On the other hand, on-path middleboxes may increase the rate-limit value in the exchanged option to a very high value. This effectively has the same effect as filtering out the option.


IANA Considerations
===================

IANA is requested to assign an MPTCP option subtype for the SRL option from the "MPTCP Option Subtypes" available at https://www.iana.org/assignments/tcp-parameters/tcp-parameters.xhtml

Acknowledgements
================

This work was supported by the ARC-SDN project and
the Walinnov MQUIC project, No. 1810018.

--- back
